Title
=====

DAMO[N,S]?: Implementing Self-driven Data Access-aware Efficient Linux System

Description
===========

DAMON[1] is a Linux kernel subsystem for efficient data access monitoring that
has been integrated into the mainline since v5.15.  The subsystem has evolved
to provide not only the monitoring, but also general access-aware system
operations.  One of the recent important advances was the introduction of a
user aims oriented system operations self driving.  The user-space tool for
DAMON, DAMO, has also evolved together.  It supports all DAMON features and
provides its own user space features.

This talk presents DAMON and DAMO, using DAMO as a demonstration tool.  It
introduces what important benefits of access-aware system operation can be
implemented with DAMON and DAMO, the internal mechanism, recent changes, and
the simple but efficient usages of those.  For easy understanding of the
topics, this talk will live-demonstrate examples for the data access profiling
and the self-tuning access-aware system memory efficiency optimizations.  After
the live demonstration, more access-aware optimization designs and
implementations including those that are currently being used on production and
planned for future development with their evaluation results will be shared.

[1] https://damonitor.github.io


Benefits to the Ecosystem
=========================

This session will help a wide range of audiences from kernel developers to
sysadmins and users understanding a relatively new feature of Linux kernel,
DAMON.  Because the presentation will include not only the explanation of the
kernel subsystem but also live demonstration of the tool and examples including
production usages with evaluation results, the understanding will be for not
only the internal mechanism of the kernel subsystem, but also the practical and
easiest ways to get the benefits for their daily life and the products.
